= detective

Detective is a gem built by BadrIT (http://www.badrit.com/) to investigate the ruby source code.
Check the examples below.

== Motivation
Tired of opening files of installed gems to know how the code is working?
Not able to know who and where that function has been overrided?
It's time to get help from a private Detective.
Detective allows you show the source and find the location of some ruby method.

== Installation
  gem install detective

== Examples
View the source of a class method ...
  require 'detective'
  
  Detective.view_source('ActiveRecord::Base.find_by_sql')

Result  
    def find_by_sql(sql)
      connection.select_all(sanitize_sql(sql), "#{name} Load").collect! { |record| instantiate(record) }
    end

View the source of an instance method ...

  Detective.view_source('ActiveRecord::Base#update_attributes')

Result
    def update_attributes(attributes)
      self.attributes = attributes
      save
    end

View the source of an overrided method ...
  ActiveRecord::Base.class_eval do
    def update_attributes(attributes)
      puts "updating attributes ..."
      self.attributes = attributes
      save
    end
  end
  
  Detective.view_source('ActiveRecord::Base#update_attributes')
    
Result
    def update_attributes(attributes)
      puts "updating attributes ..."
      self.attributes = attributes
      save
    end

Find the location of some source ...
  Detective.get_location('ActiveRecord::Base#attributes')

Result
    location
    /home/aseldawy/.gem/ruby/1.8/gems/activerecord-2.3.4/lib/active_record/base.rb
    2752

(new) You can also find source code for modules ...
  Detective.view_source('AuthenticatedSystem#current_user')
  
Result
    def current_user
      @current_user ||= (login_from_session || login_from_basic_auth || login_from_cookie) unless @current_user == false
    end

(new) You have an alternative output ...
  Detective.view_source('AuthenticatedSystem#current_user', :rdoc)
 
Result
    /home/aseldawy/aptana_studio/archiving_system/lib/authenticated_system.rb, line 11
    11:    def current_user
    12:      @current_user ||= (login_from_session || login_from_basic_auth || login_from_cookie) unless @current_user == false
    13:    end

(new) Detective is now also working with method_missing ...
  Detective.view_source('ActiveRecord::Base#find_by_id')
  
Result
    def method_missing(method_id, *args, &block)
      method_name = method_id.to_s

      if self.class.private_method_defined?(method_name)
        raise NoMethodError.new("Attempt to call private method", method_name, args)
      end

      # If we haven't generated any methods yet, generate them, then
      # see if we've created the method we're looking for.
      if !self.class.generated_methods?
        self.class.define_attribute_methods
        if self.class.generated_methods.include?(method_name)
          return self.send(method_id, *args, &block)
        end
      end
      
      if self.class.primary_key.to_s == method_name
        id
      elsif md = self.class.match_attribute_method?(method_name)
        attribute_name, method_type = md.pre_match, md.to_s
        if @attributes.include?(attribute_name)
          __send__("attribute#{method_type}", attribute_name, *args, &block)
        else
          super
        end
      elsif @attributes.include?(method_name)
        read_attribute(method_name)
      else
        super
      end
    end
  

No luck with native methods ...
  Detective.view_source('String#length')

Result
    native method

== How it works (advanced)
The idea is to invoke the given method and trace the execution of the program.
This allows us to know where is the definition of the method.
Then with the help of RubyParser, we can extract its code from the file.
The invoke of this method is made in a separate process so that it doesn't conflict with your program.
This child process is killed before the method starts its execution so the method is not really invoked.

For systems not supporting fork (like windows), the child process is replaced with a thread.
This might make some problems because it is running in the same space of your own ruby program.
We make our best to decrease the effect of this call by killing the thread before the method starts execution.
However, given that Detective will be used while developing only, we can ignore this effect.

== Copyright

Copyright (c) 2009 BadrIT. See LICENSE for details.
